# Introduction
It can be tough to approach blogging as a beginner with the right mindset. Many students can feel overwhelmed or feel that they don't have anything to contribute to the tech community by writing a blog. Check out the post below by a Flatiron grad on coding and the dreaded imposter syndrome! It's a great example of a student blog post *and* it's a great collection of thoughts on this topic.

# How I'm Coding Through Imposter Syndrome, by Rachel Bronstein

Do you ever have the sneaking suspicion that you might be a fraud? That your greatest achievements might just be slick manipulation, or that you’ve just skated by to success through pure happenstance?

If so, you’re not alone.  You might have a case of Impostor syndrome.

“Impostor syndrome” was coined by psychologists Dr. Pauline R. Clance and Suzanne A. Imes in 1978 to describe the phenomenon of an [“internal experience of intellectual phoniness”](http://www.paulineroseclance.com/pdf/ip_high_achieving_women.pdf) in high-achieving women. (Further studies have indicated that [men and women may have similar experiences with Impostor syndrome.](http://uk.businessinsider.com/men-suffer-from-impostor-syndrome-2016-1?r=US&IR=T)) Impostor syndrome isn’t a psychological condition or mental illness — nor is it uncommon, especially among high-achievers. As much as 70% of the population may experience impostorism during their life, especially students.

I’m a new coder and student, and like many women in tech, each day I face my text editor with a fresh crop of fears. My overwhelming fear: Today will be the day my peers will realize that I have absolutely no idea what on earth I’m doing.

When I’m this afraid of being found to be a fraud, it’s hard to get much done. Each keystroke could bring me closer to my inevitable, spectacular, public failure! But despite my anxieties, I know I want to write code, and somewhere within me, I believe I can do it. Here’s what I’m doing to keep committing code I’m proud of.

1.**Mind my mindset.**
Our world is often achievement-oriented. We’re praised for our ability to perform, our output, and what we’ve accomplished. Focusing on accomplishments can foster a fixed mindset, which is characterized by the belief that people (more specifically: you) have a static capability to achieve. People with a **fixed** mindset value skill and outcome over effort and process; they are likely to see difficulty as a sign of weakness or even incompetence. The opposite of fixed mindset is **growth mindset**, the belief that intelligence and ability can be developed. Those with a growth mindset welcome challenges and criticism as opportunities to learn. They see the successes of others as opportunities to learn — not signs of their own failure. (For more about mindset, [this infographic](http://examinedexistence.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/two-mindsets-fixed-and-growth-carol-dweck.jpg) is a helpful illustration of Dr. Carol Dweck’s theory.)

When I feel like an impostor, I know that I’m giving in to my fixed mindset. When I catch my automatic fixed mindset thoughts, I try to correct them. Instead of worrying that I’m not good enough when my code unexpectedly breaks, I gently remind myself: My broken code is an opportunity to learn. Each mistake I make is a chance to develop a new skill. The time I couldn’t pass an rspec test until my peer helped me? That wasn’t the moment he noticed I didn’t deserve to be there. It was the time I learned that using “self” for a class method in a module would refer to the module, not the class. And so the next time I built a module, I’d have a better sense of what I was doing. Fostering a growth mindset has allowed me to learn without fear of failure.

2.**Choose my words carefully.**
How do you talk to yourself when you code? When I step back, I’m shocked at the insults I’m slinging at myself. Whether it’s misspelling a variable or forgetting to close out a method, I react to little mistakes with a scoff: “Rachel, you dumb idiot!” It’s a joke — or is it? After a day of groaning “Duh!” when seeing a solution, telling myself how stupid my mistakes are, and internally panicking with every error message, it’s no wonder that I don’t have much faith in my abilities. And when I trash talk myself, a part of me assumes that everyone else is thinking the same thing. For example, when asking for help, I avoid my instinct to declare *“I’m bad at this.”* Actually, I’m working on it. Choosing the right words encourages the right thoughts.

3.**Admit what I don’t know.** 
Acknowledging the areas I’m still learning or struggling with goes against everything I crave: as an “impostor,” my greatest fear is that others will discover my weaknesses. When I come up against material that’s over my head, my first instinct is to BS my way through. That ensures that no one will see me fail — but it also ensures that I spend so much energy pretending that I don’t learn anything at all. Which just perpetuates the cycle of not knowing/pretending to know. The first time I calmly admitted, “I actually don’t know what you’re talking about. Can you explain?” to a group of programmers talking trade was a huge relief. Not only did it take a load off my psyche, but I actually learned something about Angular.js, which I had no experience with.

4.**Embrace the imperfect.**
Getting past Impostor Syndrome means facing the facts: I can build some things and explain some concepts. I have reasonable aptitude with Ruby. No, I’m not a complete failure. But I’m not an expert by any means — and that’s okay. I’m a student, and I’ll be a student for as long as I work with code — just like I’m a student of music, literature, politics, and everything else I’m passionate about. Chances are, I’ll never be the world’s best coder (whatever that means!), and I don’t need to be. I just need to enjoy what I do and build mastery in something I care about. Part of my Impostor Syndrome comes from extreme perfectionism; when I’m not the best, I’m a failure, and therefore at risk of being discovered as a fraud. And if I told others I was a master coder, I would be a fraud! I’m proud of being a student and taking on something new. I’m even proud of writing code that’s imperfect. It means that I have somewhere to go. If coding was easy, it wouldn’t be a worthwhile endeavor.
I’m no expert at overcoming Impostor Syndrome. I’m no expert at anything, actually. But each day I try to be a little more gentle on myself — and each day, I write better code.
